[SPACECRAFTS WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[TRAIN CHUGS]
[BIRD SCREECHES]
[THUNDER]
[FILM PROJECTOR CLICKS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[INSECTS CHIRP AND FROG CROAKS]
>>We're here in Central
America to search
for ancient technology in
Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
[ANIMAL SOUNDS]
We've seen some amazing
ancient technology in Egypt
and further evidence of ancient
technology in Peru and Bolivia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I then decided we needed to
investigate the many mysteries
of Central America and
the possible evidence
for advanced ancient
technology in that region.
Our first stop was the capital
of Costa Rica, San Jose.
It was in San Jose
that I was very
curious about the
giant stone balls that
have been found in the
southwestern part of Costa
Rica.
Many of these balls are
huge, bigger than a car.
And they've been moved
to certain parks that
are in San Jose, where people
can view these megalithic stone
balls.
I was really curious as to how
these stone balls were made.
My experiences with
Christopher Dunn
showed me that the ancients
had some kind of power tools
and engineering capabilities
much like we have today.
And in fact, the machining of
these perfectly spherical stone
balls is something that is so
difficult it could really only
be done with power tools.
Despite the fact that
these megalithic stone
balls are found
throughout Costa Rica,
the various museums
and publications
give no idea of what the
purpose was of these balls
or even how they
were constructed.
This granite ball here
at the National Museum
in San Jose, Costa Rica is
one of the better specimens.
It's perfectly round.
It's quite a large ball.
It probably weighs several tons,
possibly even up to 10 tons.
It's been carved out
of a very hard granite.
And it's an exquisite piece
of megalithic architecture.
But once again, the
purpose of these balls
and even how they were
made remains a mystery
to archeologists.
One of the theories
on Atlantis is
that Atlantis was, around 10,000
BC, a worldwide civilization,
a maritime civilization.
They left their capital city
of Atlantis, and in the ships,
went all over the world,
going to the Americas,
to Africa, to Europe,
and to all continents.
It's one of the
mysteries of Atlantis
is these giant stone balls.
These giant granite
balls are often
associated with the Atlanteans.
They're found on
many continents,
especially here in
Central America.
But these giant stone balls
have been found in Malta.
They've been found on remote
islands such as Easter Island.
There's an area of New
Zealand that also has
round stone balls like this.
Another big question with
these giant stone balls
is what they were for.
It's baffling to archeologists.
Why anyone would go through
considerable effort,
even if they had power tools,
to make these giant stone balls.
I mean what is the point?
Today, mainstream
archeologists are just
grasping at straws for
some kind of explanation.
Their main explanation
right now is
that these giant stone
balls-- and some of them
are relatively small, only
the size of a basketball
or a little bit bigger.
While others are five,
six feet in diameter--
that they are some kind
of ceremonial object.
And they have found some
of the smaller stone balls
in tombs in Costa Rica.
And it's like important chiefs,
or kings, or shamans were
buried with these stone balls--
generally the small ones.
But still, it doesn't
really explain what
these stone balls were for.
It's my theory that
these stone balls
that are found in the
tombs and burials of some
of these important people
in ancient Costa Rica,
that they didn't know what
these balls were for either.
And that these balls are many,
many thousands of years old.
They apparently washed up
like by some tidal wave
that hit the southwest
coast of Costa Rica.
And it literally
washed these balls up
into mountain jungle areas,
onto one of the islands that's
off the coast of Costa Rica.
The ancient people
of Costa Rica,
who are then using
these balls as some kind
of ceremonial object,
didn't actually
build them or
machine these balls.
They're finding them
in the jungle thinking
they are some kind
of eggs of the gods
or giant stone
balls of the gods.
And then the small ones,
just because they're
some oddball important object,
are buried with these chiefs.
But they didn't
make these balls.
They were already there.
So you have to ask yourself,
who made these balls,
and what was their function?
This is something that we
really haven't figured out.
My idea is that these balls are
from many thousands of years
ago.
The same people
who were building
at Tiwanaku, and at Cusco, and
Oyente Tambo, and Machu Picchu,
and other megalith areas
of Peru and Bolivia,
were a similar people as to
those in Central America,
including perhaps
the Olmecs, who
were building the
colossal basalt
heads and other giant
megalithic artifacts
that we can find there.
And they, with their
machine tools--
and I believe the Olmecs
had machining tools,
as were used in Egypt, as were
used in Peru, and Bolivia,
and other areas of the world.
And it was through
this that they were
making these giant stone balls.
We still don't know
exactly what they're for.
Theories say that they were
possibly used by navigators.
And that by placing these stone
balls in positions together,
were showing where
islands were for people
who were crossing the Pacific,
or crossing the Atlantic,
and in transoceanic
trading expeditions,
and things like that.
So that's one idea, that these
huge stone balls were all part
of an elaborate map system.
Perhaps too, they
were showing where
stars were and constellations.
In my mind, that's a
pretty interesting theory.
However, I don't think it
explains the really, really
large stone balls very
well, because they
are so huge and so heavy.
And it would have been so
difficult to make those.
It seems like it would have
been a lot of extra effort
that would be quite
unnecessary if you're just
trying to create star
maps and navigation
maps of islands and things.
You wouldn't need a giant stone
balls for that in my mind.
Today, these balls from the
swamps of southwestern Costa
Rica are scattered
around the country.
They're found in bank
lawns, in museums, and even
in private homes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're deep in the jungles of
Central Costa Rico at the lost
city of Guayabo.
This is a city that was unknown
to the archeological world
until 25 years ago.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the great mysteries
of Central America,
especially the area around
Costa Rica and Nicaragua,
is that we have
very little evidence
of organized city-states,
of planned communities.
And yet, here in the central
jungles of Costa Rica,
we find exactly that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We see this wide road.
We see these well-built
platforms on either side.
Yet this amazing city was
abandoned a few hundred years
before the Spanish arrived.
We don't know who the people
were who built this city.
We don't know where they went
or why they abandoned this city.
It's part of the mysteries of
Costa Rica and Central America.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THUNDER]
One of the problems with the
search for ancient technology
here in Central America
is, as you can see,
we're in a very
dense rainforest.
This makes it
extremely difficult
to preserve man-made
articles, especially metals
or artifacts made out of wood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THUNDER]
One of the other
interesting things
that we discovered in
Costa Rica is their use
of tattooing and stamps.
And in fact, the various
Indians in Costa Rica
had all sorts of fancy
textiles and body painting,
as well as tattooing
with charcoal and parts
of their own blood.
This was used, of course,
in all the Pacific Islands.
It was also used
in Southeast Asia,
and in Arabia, and
among the Egyptians.
And here, in a 1529
book that was written
by Gonzalo Fernandez
De Oviedo, they
talk about the type
of tattooing that they
were doing in Costa Rica.
And he says here, all
the Indians of Nicoya,
and especially the
leaders and their women,
have their arms painted
in that black paint that
is made with their own blood
and with charcoal, cutting
and drawing first with
blades from the flint.
One of the other unusual
ancient technology mysteries
that we uncovered
in Central America
can also be found in this
book, "Sweat of the Sun
and the Tears of the
Moon," a book about gold
and silver pre-Columbian art.
Andre Emmerich was
a Swiss Costa Rican
who was fascinated by all
of the gold and jewelry that
was found in Costa Rica,
and Panama, and Colombia,
including the oddball
gold airplanes and things.
It's mainly about the
gold work and jewelry
from Colombia, and Panama,
and from Costa Rica.
And a curious thing
is in this book.
On page 94, they show a gold
pendant found in Panama.
It's thought to be several
thousand years old.
And it has a gem inlaid in it.
It's about 4 and
1/2 inches long.
And it appears to be a
zoomorphic pendant of some kind
of heavy machinery.
If you look at it, it has what
looks like a backhoe coming out
of the back.
It's got blades in the back.
In the front it has a skid
plate and other things.
It appears to be really
a monster that was really
some kind of heavy machinery.
In ancient times,
to have electricity,
to have iron and other
very strong metals,
this would naturally
lead to power tools,
to heavy machinery, and
ultimately, even in a sense,
to flight.
It's interesting.
With this pendant being made
out of gold and an unknown gem
in the center of it, is
that gold is indestructible.
All the gold that exists
from ancient times
still exists today in
the form of jewelry,
in ingots, in coins of gold.
Gold itself was very
valuable to the ancients.
And it can't be destroyed.
It doesn't rust and
oxidize like other metals.
But there's a problem with gold.
Gold is really too soft to
work in machines and things.
Gold can be used in
electrical devices.
But otherwise it's best
used just as jewelry.
You know, there's a lot that
you don't know about the banana.
The banana is, in
fact, a seedless fruit,
a fruit that seems to be
genetically engineered
in remote antiquity to
be a seedless plant,
like a seedless grape
or a seedless orange.
Bananas exist all over the
world, even on remote islands.
Bananas are one
of the few fruits
that you can live
completely on, with protein,
and carbohydrates, and
vitamins, and other minerals.
Bananas are the
world's tallest grass.
But grass is normally
reproduced by seeds
and by tubers in their roots.
The banana, however, is unusual
in that the banana is only
able to reproduce
through its roots
and through shoots and tubers,
not through the actual fruit
itself.
Therefore, there's an
indication that some time
in remote antiquity, the banana
was genetically engineered
to be a seedless fruit.
Perhaps it was engineered in
what we like to call Atlantis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Bienvenidos a Nicaragua.
[MUSIC]
>>[SINGING IN SPANISH]
>>The next country north
of Costa Rica is Nicaragua.
And Americans don't
know Nicaragua
very well because of
the political upheavals
that have been happening
there for the last 20 years.
But I was very, very
interested in some
of the unusual
megalithic statues
that were found on
Zapatera Island, which
is an island in Lake
Nicaragua, a huge inland lake
in that country.
And on that island
have been found
dozens of strange
megalithic statues
carved into various
unusual positions
and motifs around them.
So we journeyed
north over the border
and went to Lake Nicaragua.
And from there we
chartered a boat
to take us to the remote
island of Zapatera.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Lake Nicaragua is a huge
lake the size of Puerto Rico.
In fact, early
Spanish explorers,
when they first
arrived in Nicaragua,
thought that Lake Nicaragua
was part of the ocean.
And in fact, Lake
Nicaragua was probably
part of the ocean at one time.
And that lake has the
only freshwater sharks
that are known.
And these sharks live
in Lake Nicaragua.
And at one point, that lake
had to be a saltwater lake that
was connected to the ocean.
But over time, it became
a freshwater lake.
And the sharks, over time,
adapted to the freshwater.
We decided to journey
out to Zapatera Island.
And as we proceeded
from the harbor,
we were going through a series
of small little islands.
In fact, there's 365
of these small islands.
And so we were protected.
But once we got out into the
open water of Lake Nicaragua,
the weather suddenly turned bad.
We were pelted by rainstorms.
Big waves came up on the lake.
And we didn't realize just
how dangerous this journey
was going to be.
And in fact, on that very same
day, two American missionaries
were lost on the lake
in the storms that
proceeded to pelt us
and any other boats that
were on the lake at the time.
[ROOSTER CROWS]
It was here on Zapatera
Island in Lake Nicaragua
that the American
archeologist Ephraim
Squire discovered
in 1840 over 20
mysterious megalithic statues.
These statues are in a
convent in the city of Granada
on the shores of Lake Nicaragua.
Today, these mysterious
megalithic statues
are unknown to the archeologist
and to the layperson alike.
They were found here on
a point on the island.
This island is also
a national park.
But it's rarely visited by
visitors from any country.
[MUSIC]
This is what was known as
the point of the figures
on the island of Zapatera.
This is where Squire found the
26 or more megalithic statues
carved out of basalt.
Who brought these
ancient statues here?
What were they for?
Were they part of an
ancient funerary complex?
A giant cemetery for the
ancient kings of Nicaragua?
Are they perhaps monuments
to the ancient seafarers
who came on
transatlantic voyages
in search of the Pacific Ocean?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These unusual megalithic
stones are found in many places
here on Zapatera Island.
This one's been split.
It in fact appears to be a
section of what was perhaps
a giant pillar that held up the
ceiling of some kind of temple.
How old this is and exactly
what kind of structure it
was a part of is a mystery.
This basalt column has been
carved with certain kinds
of designs and engravings.
And basalt is
extremely hard rock,
quite difficult to carve, making
construction of such an edifice
all the more mysterious.
Nicaragua has had a
tremendous history
of earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, and tidal waves.
Here's some evidence right
here, with this basalt pillar
being split by an earthquake.
Probably was many times
this size originally,
holding up part of a
ceiling of a giant building.
It too has crumbled.
And what's left of the
ruins here on Zapatera
are just a few rocks and
broken pillars like this one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now we've seen the
mysterious sights here
on the island of Zapatera,
where the statues were found.
So we will go directly
to the convent in Granada
to really view
these giant statues.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're inside the San
Francisco convent in Granada.
And this is where
the monolithic basalt
statues from the Zapatera
Island were all taken.
We find here inside
this open-air museum
over 26 very unusual, even
strange, megalithic statues,
most of them weighing
several tons.
We have zoomorphic statues,
anthropomorphic statues,
and anthrozoomorphic
statues, those statues
that combine human and
animal elements together.
This is a typical
anthrozoomorphic statue.
Appears to be the body of a man.
He's clasping his
hands at his chest.
But his head is like a
Jaguar apparently, possibly
the totem animal of this chief.
This statue is
anthrozoomorphic and, in fact,
appears to be some kind of a
warrior whose head is coming
out of a crocodile head,
possibly the kind of helmet
that he wore into warfare.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is an especially
interesting statue.
It appears to be of a
woman with some breasts.
She's wearing an
unusual head ornament.
And down here near the base
is a very finely carved cross,
very much thought of
as a European symbol.
And in fact, it's the symbol
of the Red Cross today.
This basalt stela is
actually not a statue
but some kind of a border
marker or temple marker.
And it has carved into it some
kind of serpent, perhaps a sea
serpent or giant anaconda.
In many ways, I find this very
similar to the kind of stelas
that we see around
Lake Titicaca in Peru.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This curious
anthrozoomorphic statue--
it's only the top part
of a broken statue--
is a man here with
what appears to be
a dinosaur head on top of him.
As I look at this, I
find it very curious.
And I really can't
see what other animal,
except a dinosaur, that
this might possibly be.
Notice here.
Here is the man's
head and his ear.
And here is the dinosaur
head with the teeth here,
and the eye, and the snout.
It really looks like some
kind of dinosaur mask.
This piece is apparently one of
the pillars that was holding up
the temple on Zapatera Island.
It's now been moved
here to the convent
of San Francisco in Grenada.
You can actually see
what's called tenons
at the top for other
pillar pieces to fit.
And this piece is
especially unusual
because this stone
has a dual purpose.
One purpose is as a section of
a pillar to hold up a temple.
But it also has a metallic
mold carved into it.
And this mold would have
been used apparently
for making ax heads or even
possibly keystone clamps.
And we see how molten
metals would be poured
into these hourglass shapes.
We see a channel for the
metal to come through and pour
a second ax head,
an hourglass shape.
It's clearly been used for some
kind of metal manufacturing.
This itself is curious
because it indicates
that one of the things that
was going on here on Lake
Nicaragua, at Zapatera
Island, and on the mainland,
was some kind of
metallurgical industry.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Many of these statues here are
in an unusual kneeling position
known as [INAUDIBLE].
We find this kneeling
position, which
is thought to be a symbol
of respect for authority,
here in Nicaragua.
We find it at statues at
Tiwanaku, on Lake Titicaca.
We find a statue like
this on Easter Island.
We find them in Egypt and
in the Hittite cities,
and in fact, all over the world.
This large basalt statue is
anthropomorphic in that it's
only of a man without any
apparent animal qualities.
Probably weighs several tons.
And even though it's been
defaced and extremely worn,
he appears to be
wearing a turban,
much as we see at
Titicaca, and Tiwanaku,
and of course, areas
of the Middle East.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Each one of these
monolithic basalt statues
represents a piece of the past.
If we could only understand the
symbols and the meaning of each
of these statues, it
would help us unravel
the mysteries of Nicaragua.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the interesting things
that they did here in Nicaragua
was the birdman
festival, where natives
got up on these long
poles with spinning ropes
and then spun around the pole
like a big Maypole birdman
flying festival.
This same unusual ritual also
takes place in Northeast Mexico
and at the ruins of Tajin.
There's many similarities
here in Nicaragua
with the discovery of the
Olmec civilization in Mexico
during the 1940s.
Both here in Nicaragua and
with the Olmecs in Mexico,
many of these giant
heads and basalt statues
were just found buried
in swamps and jungles.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In both Nicaragua
and Costa Rica,
there were many fine examples of
ceramics, exquisite polychrome
pottery done in zoomorphic
figurines of crocodiles,
jaguars, and anthrozoomorphic
animal-man figures, some
of the finest ceramics
that we find in the world.
One of the mysteries
of Central America
is that the Mayans, and the
Mixtecs, and the Zapotecs
were farther north.
And it's not really believed
that they had much contact
with Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
Similarly, the Incas and
other South American cultures
were farther to the south.
So we have in Nicaragua
and Costa Rica something
of a null zone here
at the southern part
of North America that's not
really definitely connected
to any of the
known civilizations
that we're aware of.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BELLS RINGING]
So we've chartered this
boat here with Don Ramon.
And we're about to head out
through the basalt islands that
are here along the
edge of Lake Nicaragua.
>>Amigo.
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
All along the edge of Lake
Nicaragua near Granada
are all of these basalt islands.
Today, people are
building houses
on some of these islands.
They appear to be
artificial, in fact.
Although it's been
thought for many years
that they're natural islands.
However, on the remote
Pacific island Pohnpei,
there was also an island city
like this known as Nan Madol.
And it has over 100 artificial
islands just like this
made out of basalt.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As we move by boat through these
basalt islands here along Lake
Nicaragua, we've
discovered something
that we think is very important.
It looks like some of these
islands are in fact artificial
and have pyramids on them.
In fact, one of
the islands appears
to be this one
straight ahead of us.
We're going to land here
and investigate what appears
to be a giant basalt pyramid.
Landing on the artificial
island with the pyramid
that we've
discovered, everything
about this unusual
place seems to be
that this is some
ancient pyramid
on this island, giant
blocks of basalt stacked up.
What we see here on this
island is rocks piled up.
You see certain levels of
terracing, very large basalt
blocks.
It seems incredible to me that
they're just here naturally.
They appear to
have been piled up.
But it's difficult to tell.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here on this pyramid
island that we've
found on the edge
of Lake Nicaragua,
are big walls with
huge basalt stones.
Some of these are definitely
weighing several tons.
There's no cement or really
indication of modern building
here.
But this is clearly man-made.
We don't know how old this is.
But someone has put
in a lot of effort
to build these walls that seem
to be part of this pyramid
island.
Exactly how old this
is, whether it's
only 50 years old or
5,000, we just don't know.
[MUSIC  PLAYING]
Our next stop was the
Gulf area of Mexico,
the area around Villahermosa,
and Veracruz, and Xalapa.
This area is the heartland
of the mysterious Olmecs.
The Olmecs are one of the most
baffling of Central America's
cultures, and
probably the oldest.
Archeologists now
trace the Olmecs back
to at least 1,300 BC.
The Olmecs are known for
their colossal heads.
These are 20-ton
basalt giant heads
that are carved from one
of the hardest rocks known.
The carving is extremely fine.
It appears to be machined.
And that some kind
of power tools
were used on these basalt heads.
How they were
transported and brought
to various areas around the
Gulf of Mexico and Mexico
is a mystery.
And similarly, like the giant
stone balls of Costa Rica,
it's not really known what the
purpose of these giant heads
was and what they
were doing with them.
It's presumed that
they were somehow
the kings, the
chiefs of the Olmecs.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here we are in Xalapa, Mexico
in the state of Veracruz,
near the Gulf Coast.
It's here in this museum
that some of the finest
Olmec statues can be found.
The Olmecs are thought
to be the mother
culture of all of Mesoamerica.
But they are the most
mysterious of all
of Mexico's many civilizations.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the early 1940s, University
of California archeologist
Matthew Stirling discovered
over five colossal Olmec heads
made out of granite, the
largest weighing over 24 tons.
It's a mystery how
the Olmecs were
able to move these giant heads
and other statues over 100
kilometers from the quarry to
their pyramid city at La Venta.
Archeologists assume
that the Olmecs
didn't know about the wheel.
The Olmecs are really a recent
discovery to archeologists.
Prior really to 1940,
archeologists and historians
did not recognize the Olmecs
and that they existed.
Certain art that was
coming out of Mexico
was noticed to be very unusual.
And in the 1930s, the
Smithsonian Institution
and the Museum of the
American Indian in New York,
they started realizing that some
of the artifacts that they were
getting were not
Mayan and couldn't
be ascribed to any of the
known cultures in Mexico.
Then in 1940, a huge
archeological conference
was held in Mexico City.
And in that conference,
Mexican archeologists
and American archeologists
presented evidence
to archeologists from
all over the world
that there was an older
culture than the Maya.
And this culture they called the
Olmecs, or the rubber people.
And in that conference,
they claimed
that the Olmecs were
the oldest of all
the cultures in Mesoamerica.
And that the Mayans,
and the Zapotecs,
and Mixtecs were all
coming ultimately
from this older culture, which
they then called the Olmecs.
So many questions
remain about the Olmecs.
Who were they?
Were they from Africa?
From Egypt?
From Atlantis?
We know that the Olmecs
are over 3,000 years old.
But what were they doing here?
Why were they carving
these giant heads?
Why did they move them?
What happened to them?
These are some of the
greatest mysteries of history.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This Olmec alter is
from around 1,200
BC, according to archeologists.
It's also carved out of basalt
and shows a man emerging
from a cave, possibly
the creation cave.
We can see here
how it was buried
and has been almost
completely eroded over time.
In my book, "The
Mystery of the Olmecs,"
I discuss much of the history
and how many of the giant
statues were found.
In fact, one of the most
famous Olmec statues,
which was discovered in
1945 at San Lorenzo, which
is near to Veracruz along
the Gulf Coast of Mexico,
this giant basalt
head was completely
buried in the ground, as were
almost all of these huge heads.
And people were walking over it.
And a trail happened
to just pass over
the forehead of this
giant buried head.
And eventually
archeologists realized
that, yeah, this rock that
was just exposed on this trail
was part of this huge and
beautifully carved Olmec head.
And of course, like many
of the giant Olmec heads,
it looks very African.
When we look at
the heads, we see
that not only are they
colossal, weighing many tons,
but the facial
features seem to not
be American Indian
but more African,
with the wide nose,
and the thick lips.
They're wearing some
kind of leather helmet.
They have the stern
expressions of warriors.
Many Olmec statues have a
trademark frown on their face.
All of these features
puzzle archeologists.
And it's one of the
mysteries of the Olmecs.
They appear to be
Negroes from Africa.
Many of them have thick
beards and mustaches
and appear to be Caucasians
from the eastern Mediterranean.
Other Olmecs seem very Oriental
and Chinese in their look.
Is it possible that thousands
of years ago in southern Mexico
and Guatemala and Honduras
that this area was
some kind of trading zone
where ships and seafarers came
across the Atlantic,
across the Pacific,
meeting in Central America.
And this early culture is
known today as the Olmecs.
With some of these
colossal heads,
they are intricately
carved out of basalt,
which is extremely hard stone.
And carving these basalt heads,
in my mind, would have required
some pretty advanced technology
and tools, including, I think,
power tools.
In fact, one of
the colossal heads
from San Lorenzo was very
interesting and unique because
it was a 20-ton basalt
head, but along parts
of the top of the helmet are
all these strange pockmarks
and circular grooves in it.
And in fact, archeologists
have wondered
about these strange
pockmarks on this head
because it's like after it had
been carved as a complete stone
head, someone then took
what was a power tool
and was basically
dishing out parts
of the head with this power
tool in an effort to deface it.
And this has baffled
archeologists
for a number of reasons.
One, they don't know
why someone would
try to deface this basalt
head with these pockmarks.
And they can't figure
out how these marks would
have been made on the head
because, in their mind,
the Olmecs were
primitive people.
They didn't have
knowledge of the wheel.
Of course, they didn't
have power tools.
But how they could have bashed
out these little circular
pockmarks, they
can't figure out.
And in fact, they have
all of the indications
of being some kind
of a power tool
that was dishing out these
little circular holes
on this basalt head.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Olmecs were also known
for cranial deformation.
They were, as I
sometimes call them,
cone heads, like in South
America and other areas
of the world like Malta, the
Kurds, the [INAUDIBLE] in Egypt
like Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
and their children all
also had elongated craniums.
This was done also,
apparently, in ancient China.
It was done on remote
Pacific Islands like Vanuatu.
And the Olmecs are
particularly well known
for having these
deformed cranium.
What the purpose of
that was we don't know.
Some of these people had
crania that was twice
the size of our own heads.
How were they doing this?
One of the ways that,
apparently, they
did it was they
took a baby's head
and the plates in your
head haven't fused yet
when you're a small baby.
And by binding the head, you're
able to elongate the skull
and essentially deform it.
Some of these people had their
heads flattened and very wide.
Others had their heads
extremely elongated
so that they were narrow and
came to a top, as a conehead.
We don't know why
people did this.
But it was a practice
used throughout the world
and is quite unusual.
Just cranial deformation
in itself is, in some way,
evidence for ocean going
travel, trans-Pacific,
trans-Atlantic
kind of voyager's.
The idea that people in Africa,
and the Middle East, and China,
and remote Pacific
islands, and in Mexico,
and South America, even
the Chinook Indians
all did this separately
and invented it separately,
it doesn't seem right.
I mean, this is something that
people had to learn culturally.
And it is, to say the
least, highly unusual.
Notice here, on
this Olmec statue,
he's wearing a top knot on
his head, which may have
been the way he wore his hair.
We find this curious
topknot on the head
is also found in the
statues of Easter Island.
One of the really strange
statues in the museum
is the statue that
looks very Egyptian.
Notice that he is
apparently wearing the false
beard that we associate
so much with the pharaohs.
Other parts of his
head, too, seem
to be Egyptian-type pharaonic
headdress that he's wearing.
Looking at this
sculpture, you might
think you were in a
museum in Cairo, Egypt.
Notice here again how his
hands are on his knees.
This is known as the
[INAUDIBLE] position.
He's wearing an
unusual headdress
with the ball in front.
It's possible that there
was a snake here too.
This altar would have
been very Egyptian.
His headdress as well
is very Egyptian.
It's a very fine and
well made statue.
Some Olmec statues are
extremely unusual, even
abstract in their nature,
something you might
find in a modern art museum.
One of the interesting
things about the Olmecs
too is that their
core area is known
as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
And the isthmus of Tehuantepec
is that narrow part
of Mexico in the very south.
And it's where Mexico
is at its narrowest,
between the Atlantic Ocean
and the Pacific Ocean.
And in fact, this is the
core area of the Olmecs.
And the Olmecs were
really on both coasts.
They were on the Atlantic
Coast and on the Pacific coast.
So the Olmecs could have had
ultimately ports on two oceans.
This Isthmus of
Tehuantepec too has
a lot in common with today's
current Panama Canal.
Back in the 1800s, when
the Panama Canal was first
being conceived,
there were three areas
in Central America that
were being considered
to try and create a transit
zone between the Atlantic
and the Pacific.
Panama was, of course,
being considered
because it had a series of
lakes and was a narrow area.
Nicaragua was also being
considered for this
because boats could
come from the Atlantic
into Lake Nicaragua and they
could get very, very close
to the Pacific Ocean.
However, there was still a
narrow but high mountain range
that's separating Lake
Nicaragua with the Pacific.
The third area
that was considered
was the isthmus of
Tehuantepec in Mexico.
And what the Mexican
government ultimately did
was build a railroad between
the Atlantic and the Pacific
to bridge this narrow area.
But it's kind of curious
because the Olmecs themselves
had already realized that,
yeah, this area was--
the Tehuantepec
isthmus in Mexico
was an area where you could
have ports on the Pacific
and ports on the Atlantic.
And right in the
middle of that area
was the early megalithic
cities in Mexico,
such as Monte Alban and Mitla.
And these areas too were part
of the heartland of the Olmecs
and ultimately became
Mixtec and Zapotec cities.
Here's another example of
the very unusual Olmec art
and style.
It's very distinct.
But the stylization is so
unique, almost futuristic.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's thought that the
Olmecs were the mother
culture of Mesoamerica.
As archeologists
studied the Olmecs,
they realized that many of the
things that had been previously
ascribed to the
Mayans having invented
had really been invented
by the Olmecs before them.
And we're talking about the
Mayan calendar, the number
system, the hieroglyphic
system, even the building
of early Mayan pyramids such
as the ones at Uaxactun,
north of Tikal.
All of these things really
began with the Olmecs.
And it was the Mayans
who essentially inherited
all of this scientific
knowledge that ultimately
came from the Olmecs.
Year after year, archeologists
discover new things
about the Olmecs, pushing
them farther back in time
and deeper into the
heart of Mexico.
Only recently archeologists have
discovered the oldest writing
in the Americas, which is Olmec.
Also they've discovered Olmec
remains near Mexico City.
What caused the collapse of
this great early civilization?
We may never know the
secrets of the Olmecs.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Next we'll be continuing
our adventures in Mexico,
going to the Great Pyramid
of Cholula in central Mexico
and to the enigmatic pyramids
of Teotihuacan and Tula.
And then north over the border
into Arizona and New Mexico
to look for the lost cities
and ancient mysteries
of the southwest.
[MUSIC PLAYING]